Introduction
Given the abudance of Hydrogen in the universe, the Lyman alpha line forms an important component of radiation fields in a wide range of astrophysical settings. My goal is to characterize its role in driving outflows in exoplanet atmospheres. Here I will present novel additions to the solution of Lyman Alpha radiation transfer in spherical geometry, and show that these new additions correct for a discrepancy in the Lyman Alpha spectra of previous works compared to Monte Carlo simulations.

Background
Recent observations from the Hubble Space Telescope have revealed large Lyman Alpha transit depths around a handful of exoplanets, indicating the presence of radiation-driven outflows of atomic Hydrogen. These observations motivate a study of the interaction between hydrogen atoms and Lyman Alpha radiation, emitted by both the star and by recombinations in the atmosphere. The main interaction mechanism of interest is resonant scattering.

What is resonant scattering?
Consider the rest frame of a hydrogen atom. In this frame, a Lyman Alpha photon can excite the electron to the n=2 state. When the electron de-excites, it will emit a Lyman Alpha photon in a random direction. But, due to the atom's velocity in the lab frame, the emitted photon will have a slightly different frequency than Lyman Alpha.

What is Resonant Scattering?
That is Resonant Scattering - the absorption and near-immediate re-emission of a photon of a certain wavelength by an atom. Due to the atom's thermal velocity, the photon undergoes a slight frequency shift during the interaction, and we call this resonant "scattering" because it happens on such short timescales that it can be treated like a scattering process. In regions of low gas density, such as the upper atmospheres of exoplanets, resonant scattering dominates over other de-excitation processes like collisional de-excitation or broadening, for example.

Why does this matter for atmospheric escape?
So, why is resonant scattering so important in atmospheres? Well, the cross section for interaction between a photon and a neutral hydrogen atom is sensitively dependent on the photon's frequency. Thus, a photon with frequency in the line wing will be optically thin to the gas, meaning it can travel much further between scatterings, while a photon nearer to the core can barely diffuse in space because its mean free path is so small. Instead, these photons must diffuse in frequency until they become optically thin. Thus, we have a diffusion process in both space and frequency at the same time.

Previous analytic solution
This problem was first solved in 1973 by JP Harrington, who found that, with the right change of variables, the radiative transfer equation simplifies to the Poisson equation, which has a well-defined homogeneous solution using separation of variables. Upon enforcing the boundary condition, however, this solution gives zero mean intensity at the surface and makes the separation constant frequency-dependent, so the variables are no longer truly separated.

Novel, semi-analytic solution
What I have done is introduce a boundary condition correction term, which, when added to the fiducial solution derived by Harrington, enforces the correct flux condition at the surface. We handle the frequency-dependent boundary condition using a Fourier expansion in frequency, which yields a semi-analytic solution to the problem using a numerical Fourier integral. This new solution is published in McClellan et al 2022, which you can access here by scanning this QR code.

Results
So let's apply this to a Lyman Alpha spectrum. These black scatter points were produced by a Monte Carlo simulation, and show the characteristic double-peaked profile due to the large Lyman alpha cross section at line center. It's much easier for photons to diffuse in space when their frequencies are further into the line wing, which is why we see most of the photons escaping at these peaks, tens of Doppler widths from the line center. Here I have overplotted a few solutions - the yellow solid line is the fiducial solution, and the blue dotted line is our new correction term. When these are added together, we get a new solution, this green dashed line, that agrees much better with the Monte Carlo data points. This corrects for the 5-10% excess in the fiducial solution at the spectral peaks, which is actually persistent across all previous works that use the Harrington solution. We have examined the agreement of our solution at various optical depths, finding that the scale of the boundary condition correction goes as (a tau0)^(-1/3), where a is the "damping parameter" and tau0 is the line-center optical depth. In this plot, the optical depth is 10^7, so you can see that even at very high values of tau0 the correction factor is substantial, and due to this tau^-1/3 scaling the correction becomes even larger at lower line-center optical depths. So, our correction term fully quantifies the errors of the previous solutions to this problem and tells us how that error scales with the optical depth and the damping parameter.

Current work
I have recently used our new solution to implement a Monte Carlo acceleration scheme. How it works is that when a photon's path in the simulation exceeds a certain optical depth threshold, we draw a spherical domain around it and sample the photon's escape properties from that sphere with statistical distributions rather than letting the photon do a random walk with such a short path length. This replaces billions of computational steps and has led to some incredibly promising performance speedups, while minimally affecting the escape spectrum. My end goal here is to perform a robust, computationally-efficient simulation of an irradiated atmosphere with fully-coupled hydrodynamics and radiation forces, which would ordinarily be an extremely costly simulation without the Monte Carlo acceleration.












